How to Pack Light

I have had the priveledge of rescuing a stranded friend recently. She was visiting Chicago, and though her itinerary didn't leave time to visit friends in the area (such as your's truely), some bad timing resulted in her missing her train out. We decided this was for the best, as 1) there was much we needed to catch up on and 2) she would have been stranded in Milwaukee instead due weather had she caught her train. However, for a two day trip, she packed an apallingly large amount of stuff. Thus inspiring this somewhat lengthy guide for how to pack as little as possible.
Pirmary Considerations When Packing

The main consideration to this guide is an emphasis on mobility and the reduction of stress. The intention is minimalism, and though it may not be for everyone, the method descirbed here has served me well during a period of my life which involved frequent traveling.

The reduction of stress comes from the balance of several factors: preparedness, mobility, things that you would feel loss should they be ruined; lost; or stolen, the cost of said things, and how many bags you have to keep track of.

There is a simple rule, if you follow nothing else in this guide: If you can fit everything in one small backpack, then you are doing it right. A small backpack. Not one of those freakish backpacks that can fit a million text books and will cause spinal problems. If you get spinal problems from your backpack, then you are doing it wrong.

Another useful thing to keep in mind is: you are going somewhere ostensibly to do something. You shouldn't need to bring entertainment with you - odds are the trip will involve seeing a new place or meeting with people you don't see on a regular basis. F-book can wait until you get home.
Internet and Gadgetry

Bring one of the following options for your internet needs, listed in order of preference:

    nothing
    a smart phone
    a small tablet
    a netbook
    a laptop

For android users of smartphones and gps enabled tablets: google maps lets you download an offline cache of the map for a given area. I highly recommend doing so, as it will allow you to use less power while navigating by gps enabled map.

If the nature of your trip dictates that you need to bring a laptop, you may also want to bring a smart phone anyway for tethering. For android users on cruddy carriers that block or charge more for tethering - you can get around this with the "foxfi" app, which lets you host a wireless hotspot from your phone to let other devices connect to the internet through it. Personally, I've found it to be fairly painless to use.

It probably goes without being said, but make sure you have the power cords for everything. Don't bother bringing a flash drive or data cables. If you need to transfer files between devices, use email.
Toiletries

Bring your meds, feminine hygene supplies (if applicable), a comb, and maybe a tooth brush. Don't bring anything else. If you're visiting someone's home, odds are they'll be fine with you using their soap or toothpaste. If you're staying at a hotel, you can often get additional supplies (tooth paste, shaving supplies, etc) at the front desk free of charge. Failing that, just buy them at a local drug store.
Clothing While in Transit

    A hat.
    One pair on comfortable shoes. For the love of god, do not wear high heels.
    One outfit of form-fitting yet flexible clothing. Form-fitting clothing makes security checkpoints less of a pain. Flexible clothing keeps you comfortable after sitting in a tiny chair for eight hours. With luck, that chair is not in the security checkpoint.
    1 pair of clean sock for each day of travel. This small comfort will go a long ways for your trip back home. Save your fluffiest most wonderful socks for the last day.

Clothing For a Week's Stay

... or any extended stay a week or longer. Use whatever laundry facilities are available to you if you need them.

    One to three pairs of underwear.
    Two pairs of pants + one skirt.
    Three tops
    Three pairs of socks
    If you have room: an additional pair of shoes.

Clothing For a Weekend Stay

If you're only going to be somewhere for two days, don't bring anything extra beyond what is listed in the "Clothing While in Transit" section.
Clothing For Exceptional Circumstances

If you're going some place cold and/or wet, bring a jacket with you. Wear it while traveling - if you get too hot, tie it around your waist. Consider wearing warm boots instead of shoes for traveling.

If you need formal wear for your destination, bring as little as you can get away with. Ideally, one singular outfit. Be a punk and rock the high-tops instead of bringing a third pair of shoes. Change out of the formal clothing when you can, so as not to get it dirty if you need to wear it more than once.
Things to Leave at Home

    All but one credit card.
    All unecessary cards in your wallet.
    Don't bring your favorite clothing if you're staying in a hotel (bedbugs)
    Most toiletries.
    Your keys. Well, bring a house key, but tuck it somewhere safe in your bag. Better if you just hide one in your yard somewhere.
    dvds, cd, misc electronics. Your gameboy.
    drugs and alcohol
    Blankets and bedding.

Good Ideas to Bring

    Printed copies of tickets, maps, phone numbers for friends in the area, phone numbers for your bank (see back of your credit card), the address you're staying at, and map / directions.
    A paper-back book. Pick something you've read a million times, and could read a million more. For me, that book is American Gods.
    A small notebook and several pens.
    Headphones. Even if you didn't bring electronics with you, you can wear them to deter people from talking to you.
    A celphone. Preferably one with a camera. Don't forget the charger.
    Something with a camera on it. The smaller and cheaper the device, the better.
    Your drivers license / passport / national id. Look up what is required for the mode of travel you intend to take.
    "Safe passage letter" if you're transgender. Tuck it in your notebook.

Considerations for International Traveling

    Don't bring expensive things with you. Keep the amount of electronic devices and perpipherals at a minimum. This is important for both customs as well as being more vulnerable than you would be while traveling in your country of residence.
    If you're traveling to an exotic part of the world, make sure you have the recommended vaccinations.
    Check the requirements for a visa before buying your plane tickets.
    Bring a good phrase book.
    Bring a power converter for the destination country's electrical standard(s).

Putting it all together

Make a checklist of all of the items you intend to bring. Try to keep this list down to as few as possible. For short trips, consider not bringing a laptop with you. Odds are, if you are not sure if you need something, you don't need it. If it turns out you did need it, just buy it at your destination or borrow someone else's. A checklist will help sort this out. Don't just cram stuff into a bag because it looks like it might come in handy.

Preparedness comes from having information documented on paper. Anxiety comes from bringing a bunch of extraneous junk with you.
